---
layout: post
title: "Memes vs The World"
subtitle: "This is our meme world, everyone else is just living in it."
date: 2021-08-10
blocktime: 695091
source: https://twitter.com/dergigi/status/1425202084782264326
redirect_from: /memeworld
author: Gigi
category: bitcoin
tags:
 - Bitcoin
 - Writing
translations:
 - language: Russian
   url: https://twitter.com/TonyCrusoe/status/1444715787244220418
   archive: https://archive.is/7ThQA
   author: Tony
   author_url: https://twitter.com/TonyCrusoe/
 - language: Chinese
   url: https://spotlight.soy/detail?article_id=8tifg8snj
   archive: https://archive.is/WoffR
   author: Katakoto
   author_url: https://spotlight.soy/katakoto
---

> This is our meme world, everyone else is just living in it.

With this quote by [bitstein](https://twitter.com/bitstein) I began my
talk about "memes" and "the world" at the
[BTC Zitadelle](https://twitter.com/BTCZitadelle) this weekend. ðŸ‘‡

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.001.jpeg" %}

My talk wasn't about memes, since I wouldn't be able to top Bitstein's
talk anyway.

It was about the difference between memes and the world.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.002.jpeg" %}

Memes are thoughts, ideas, information.

> \[A meme is\] a unit of cultural information, such as a cultural
> practice or idea, that is transmitted verbally or by repeated action
> from one mind to another.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.003.jpeg" %}

Our world is not made up of memes, but of objects. It is made up of
tangible things that obey the laws of physics.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.004.jpeg" %}

Informational constructs and physical objects are very different. They
behave differently. We can use these differences to our advantage.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.005.jpeg" %}

In the English language the phrase "The map is not the territory"
captures it well. A map can lie, reality - by definition - can not.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.006.jpeg" %}

A map might resemble the territory, but it will always be imperfect,
since there never is and never will be a one-to-one mapping between map
and territory. There can't be.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.007.jpeg" %}

Artists know this. Philosophers know this. We, as a society, know this.
The map is not the territory. This is not a pipe.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.008.jpeg" %}

As a side note, this is also the root of the evil that is fiat money.
Fiat money is a map without an underlying reality. The map decoupled
from the underlying reality of gold and silver over time.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.009.jpeg" %}

Back to information vs objects: information can be shared freely. It
isn't scarce like physical objects. You can share an idea without losing
your idea. The only way to "move" information from one medium to another
medium is to copy it.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.010.jpeg" %}

This is important because money is information.

There are two ways to represent monetary information: informational
lists, and physical tokens. "Ledgers" and "tokens" both represent who
owes what to whom.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.011.jpeg" %}

Physical tokens speak for themselves, lists do not.

Lists have the double-spend problem, require trust, have counter-party
risk, and can be disconnected from reality. Physical tokens do not have
these problems. That's why cash is king.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.012.jpeg" %}

Additionally, physical tokens are usually costly to produce, require no
permission to use, and can be validated easily. They have problems too:
they can be forcefully taken away from you and can be counterfeit.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.013.jpeg" %}

The root problem is this: once you try to map reality into an
informational space, you take a "snapshot" of the current state of the
world. The map is and always will be disconnected from reality. It is a
snapshot at best, a lie at worst.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.014.jpeg" %}

Every time you represent a real-world object as information, you run
into the oracle problem: you need to trust someone that the information
reflects reality accurately. Additionally, you need a trusted 3rd party
to update the information as soon as the real world changes.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.015.jpeg" %}

To keep the map and the territory in sync, you'd need magical lists that
update themselves as soon as the underlying reality changes.

This is usually solved via centralization: one list is the source of
truth. One trusted body is in charge of keeping the list up-to-date.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.016.jpeg" %}

This is why "bananas on a blockchain" don't work. This is why
"gold-backed cryptocurrencies" don't work. No physical object can ever
be "put on a blockchain" without relying on a trusted third party.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.017.jpeg" %}

This is also true for digital bananas, and hashes of digital bananas.
The hash of the object is like a fingerprint. It has no permanent
relationship to the object itself. There is an inherent disconnect.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.018.jpeg" %}

NFTs don't change that. The jpg that you "own" can be lost, corrupted,
duplicated, or hashed & sold again to another fool. You own a hash of
something that is not scarce and you can not recreate this thing from
the hash alone. You own a garbled map and no territory.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.019.jpeg" %}

Bitcoin fixes this by going in the \*opposite\* direction.

It starts with information, and makes its own reality via its continued
operation.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.020.jpeg" %}

It defines the map and implies the territory. All participants
voluntarily "act out" Bitcoin and a shared reality emerges because of
it.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.021.jpeg" %}

To run the informational construct that is Bitcoin, real electrons in
the real world have to be pushed around.

You can not follow the rules defined in the Bitcoin protocol without
real-world consequences and costs.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.022.jpeg" %}

Bitcoin doesn't create apples, of course. It creates blocks:
informational constructs that follow a certain pattern.

Adhering to this pattern requires computation. And computation, in turn,
requires time and energy.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.023.jpeg" %}

In other words: Bitcoin, the informational construct, starts a machine -
the motor of the Bitcoin world, if you will - that produces valid ledger
entries as its output.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.024.jpeg" %}

The genius of Satoshi was to embed a difficulty adjustment into the
machine that ensures that the motor won't stop. The difficulty
adjustment is what makes the Bitcoin system an autopoietic system:
capable of reproducing and maintaining itself.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.025.jpeg" %}

All of it works precisely because proof-of-work requires energy. You
can't fake it. You can't argue with it. You can't get it for free. You
will have to push around real electrons in the real world to find valid
bitcoin blocks.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.026.jpeg" %}

The fact that Bitcoin is probabilistic doesn't matter. We can make
sufficiently accurate statements about what happened in the real world
by looking ONLY at information - nothing else.

Reality is probabilistically embedded in the information DIRECTLY.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.027.jpeg" %}

Ergo: In Bitcoin, the map is the territory.

We can infer everything we care about by looking at the map alone. We
make probabilistic inferences about what had to happen in our universe
for these numbers to appear.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.028.jpeg" %}

If you understand this properly, it will blow your brains out. We can
make accurate inferences about the real world - based on the laws of
thermodynamics, information, and probability theory - by LOOKING AT A
NUMBER.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.029.jpeg" %}

Because of this, the Bitcoin timechain is the most truthful record we
have of past events. No other information comes close in terms of
certainty when asking the question: "did this really happen?"

It is this fact that allows Bitcoin to be the base layer of our future.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.030.jpeg" %}

I got an overwhelming amount of support over the last couple of years,
which is why I often say that Bitcoin is Love. I often say it
half-jokingly, but it is also profoundly true.

All interactions are voluntary. They have to be. Ideas are non-violent.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.031.jpeg" %}

Fighting Bitcoin is fighting a global, voluntary, opt-in network, that
does nothing but utilize math and physics to enable value transfer via
the exchange of messages.

The game is on and we are winning.\
Peace, Love, and Truth are on our side.

Bring it.

{% include image.html name="bitcoin-zitadelle-en.032.jpeg" %}

P.S: I hope to make the slides and the source material available soon,
as well as publish the relevant chapters of my upcoming book as soon as
they are good enough.

A recording of the original talk, given in German, is available here:

P.P.S: This talk was inspired by a comment by
[nvk](https://twitter.com/nvk) - he was trying to explain these things
to [Lex Fridman](https://twitter.com/lexfridman). I would like to try
too, but I am still blocked with Love by Lex.
